how good is AI code generation really
there's clearly enormous commercial
potential for companies if AI can
generate good effective code more
efficiently ultimately at lower cost
than human programmers but can I really
do that clearly AI can generate code but
is it good and effective that's our
topic for today
[Music]
hi I'm Dave Farley of continuous
delivery and welcome to my channel if
you haven't been here before please do
hit subscribe and if you enjoy the
content today hit like as well in this
episode I'm going to be asking for your
help but don't worry I think it'll also
be some fun some friends of mine are
conducting some interesting academic
research into AI assisted coding and are
looking for people to take part in their
experiment they're aim is to see if AI
systems can really help us to build high
quality code in the real world of
professional software development so do
watch for a chance to do something
interesting help with some research and
also win some prizes whatever you think
about machine Learning Systems writing
code whether or not they're useful tools
that help us to do a better job or
whether or not they're just all going to
replace all of our programming jobs next
week it seems certain that they change
the game
but it also seems pretty clear that we
don't really know how yet I don't think
that anyone really understands yet the
scale or nature of this change we may
guess or imagine what is coming but it
is certainly true that for the first
time we have something other than people
that can write code and we don't know
what that means where it will be helpful
and where it Won't Anyone who says that
they know how this will play out is only
guessing this stage we're extremely
fortunate on on the continuous delivery
channel to be sponsored by equal experts
transic topple honeycomb and Ultra edit
equal experts is a multinational
consultancy built on applying the ideas
and techniques that we talk about here
to build great software for their
clients transic is a financial
technology company applying Advanced
continuous delivery techniques to
deliver low latency trade rout services
to some of the biggest financial
institutions in the world topple build
software to make pair programming easier
for people who work remotely honeycom
help engineering teams deeply understand
their own production systems through
observability and Ultra edit is a
powerful configurable text editor
capable of hex and text code editing
which boasts on rivaled performance
particularly handling large files all
these company offer products and
services that are very very well aligned
with the topics that we discuss on this
channel every week so if you're looking
for excellence in continuous delivery
and software engineering in general do
click on the links in the description
below and check them out one things that
seems pretty clear to me at least for
the current generation of large language
models is that they write code in a
profoundly different way to the way that
human beings write code and this is
different in ways that matter maybe even
limiting to how far the help the AI
assisted coding can take us the most
profound change as far as I can see is
the loss of
reproducibility if we ask a large
language model to generate some code for
us it will do so and it may or may not
be good code but if we ask the same
large language model in precisely the
same words to write the same code again
it won't generate the same code again
it'll provide a new implementation to
meet our needs and that too may be good
or may be bad but there's nothing to say
that the bits that were good before are
still good in this new version because
we aren't enhancing what's already there
before the AI is rewriting everything
from scratch if we use the AI assistance
this way this profoundly changes our
relationship with the code it's also
very similar to the way that many past
attempts at making programming easier
have failed in the past because it
misses something really important about
software development there's a danger
that we rely on the rather naive
assumption that code creation or
generation happens once and is then over
leaving no room for refinement and
correction as we learn more about what
our users need and how best to solve the
problems that we are faced with in human
software development we've learned how
to deal with this kind of complexity
with ideas like Version Control giving
us the freedom to make mistakes and to
recover from it quickly easily and
cheaply when we do building high quality
code in systems is for humans at least
always an incremental process these days
mediated through Version Control complex
systems are built step by step verifying
things after each version controlled
step those steps may be big or small big
steps in the form of new releases over
years or even decades think of the
evolution of Windows or Mac OS version
by version or better we may use small
steps each one representing tiny
increments in the behavior of our system
think continuous delivery all this is
still an incremental process but
incrementalism like this relies on us
being able to reestablish a known
starting point and then modifying the
code to add new features or correct
broken ones if every change means
rebuilding the whole system from scratch
we even those of us who are machines
limit our ability to learn and build on
top of what we've already learned and so
improve as we go large language models
don't obviously allow for this and this
is a very big deal because as far as we
can tell this is the only way in which
you can learn and improve things in
human terms I would and do argue that
the defining characteristics for quality
in software is measured by our ability
to change it in large part that's
because it facilitates our ability to
grow and evolve our software
incrementally in this way high quality
software is easy to change lowquality
software is not it really is that simple
so does this mean that generative AI
helps or hinders in creating highquality
software on that basis some of my
friends that equal experts code scene
and the department of computer science
at lond University in Sweden agree that
this is an interesting question and have
designed a study to evaluate it previous
empirical studies of AI code assistants
have found that they offer substantial
increases in productivity but as we know
from practical Human Experience we can
easily misjudge this kind of thing by
looking at the wrong time scales when it
comes to productivity I may make
progress faster over the course of a few
days by cutting Corners not testing and
building crap software but over the
course of weeks and months or years the
cost of this strategy leads to us
building Big Balls of unmaintainable mud
and that can slow or even halt the
process of software development alt
together so it's certainly not a gain in
productivity the Dora metrics tell us
that for human-built software at least
we must build high quality software if
we want to move quickly so does AI
assistance help us to keep moving fast
over longer periods of time does it help
us to build more maintainable code
that's the question that we'd like to
answer in this study the study will
operate in two phases with three
different groups of people and we are
looking for people for each group the
basic idea is that maintainable code is
easy to reason about and change by
someone other than the original author
so that is what we aim to test we start
with some tricky poor buggy code and the
subjects of the experiment are then
tasked with modifying it
these subjects hopefully you are formed
into two groups one group is asked to
complete the task with the help of AI
code assistance and the other without
GitHub conducted a study of the use of
co-pilot with 95 professional
programmers tased with implementing an
HTTP server in JavaScript a little while
ago this study found that AI assistance
made the developers in the group that
use the AI assistance 55. 8% faster on
average when completing this task than
developers working without the aid of
co-pilot our research is aimed to look
at the to me more important measure of
the maintain maintainability of the
output rather than short-term
development performance which as I've
already suggested is a very poor measure
of software development in the real
world because if the output of AI
assisted code is easier to maintain then
we can be more confident that it really
is helping us to improve our throughput
but if it's not easier to maintain then
AI assisted code will ultimately be more
costly in the long run than working
without it in phase two of the study we
will evaluate the maintainability of the
output from each of the groups in Phase
One people in The Phase 2 group will
take the output of the coding Challenge
from phase one not knowing if the output
was generated with or without AI
assistance
and then they will be asked to complete
some new tasks to modify this code the
study will determine which is easier to
modify the AI assisted code or the not
AI assisted code the code will be
evaluated based on several different
metrics including code scenes very well
regarded measures of code Health time to
complete the task and the perceived
productivity of the people working on it
based on Nicole forren space framework
the problem itself is a fun real world
simulation of the kind of things that
human programmers do all the time the
code is complex enough to be interesting
more complicated than a simple coding
Carter for example but simple enough to
be able to understand and do useful work
within just a few hours for disclosure
here I should say that my name is on
this study but the people at lond
University equal experts and code scene
have done all of the work I hope that
you'll join us and give us a few hours
of your time we expect the exercise will
take you 2 to 4 hours to complete if
you're interested in signing up there's
a link in the description below or you
could use this QR code both link to a
short survey that will help the
researchers to evaluate your fit as a
subject for the study and allocate you
to an appropriate group your code and
data that the researchers will collect
will be completely Anonymous and
everyone who completes the exercise as a
subject will win a prize including some
signed books from and me but of course
the most rewarding thing of all is that
everyone who takes part will be adding
to our understanding and knowledge of
what AI code assistants can really do
for us as developers so please do sign
up and try and fix the poor code that
the researchers have tried so hard to
make nasty enough to be ready for you
thank you very much for watching and if
you enjoy our stuff here on the
continuous delivery Channel then do
consider supporting us by joining our
patreon community and thanks once again
to our patrons who support our work here
thank you and bye-bye
[Music]